A lecture in the world.
We had one of them.
Because I'm Mr. Bruinses, a professor of Dutch literature.
He also writes a lot about books and book collectors.
And he just had, there was a lecture, the Dutch antiquarian, I say, profession, perhaps you say.
during the second world war so and he just it was just a few weeks ago so that's the reason i get medicine dutch so it was a lecture about uh about uh antiquarian booksellers in the netherlands and then uh what kind of people that were and then the immigrants from germany this is which were kind of yes which was another sort of uh dealers and said yes but he asked many colleagues
Also the old ones, the Jewish colleagues, not many of them didn't want to talk or didn't want to have it in print because it is not... I don't know how you use the word anecdotes.
In Holland you also have anecdotes.
But those are funny things and I don't think there's many funny things.
No, anecdotes, no, it does not mean funny.
No, because you also use the word and then it must have something funnier.
No, no, no, no, it means memories, it means experiences.
Yes, yes, yes.
okay and uh you know i talked to miguel israel for three hours last night you know he lost his brother uh yes that's nothing funny about that no no is this something i can i can take or uh yes i can ask for another copy of mr bounces yes because i have somebody who can read the dutch for me yes okay yes a fellow i used to work with yes i will try to get enough for myself because so i can take this one yes it will help a lot yeah now you are what fifth generation
bookseller for generation yeah that is the painting that's my great grandfather so after him the business is made i'm so sorry my dog is never so uh you were pointing out uh
Your family over here.
Yes.
Now, that was Loefi Goos that after him the business is named.
Loefi Goos, that was Antiquiaat.
Now, what part did you to go into the business?
Why did you decide to become a bookseller?
Why?
When?
Yeah.
Now, after, not after school, when I started studying history hard.
And during that period,
First I started to work with the Bayers, it's an auction firm for books.
I worked there for two years and then to the family business, yes.
And then my mother was running the business.
It was actually the firm of my father's family, but my father died already in 1955.
So my mother continued.
So there is a tradition of women working in the business in your family.
Yes.
Is this something you always expected?
I'm curious because you are the next generation.
I am interested in generational.
Is this something you always expected to do?
No, not at all.
No, no.
When I was in school, not at all.
I thought I was selling medicine or something like that.
No.
And what kinds of, these are beautiful books.
Are these books stocked that I see around me in here?
Are these books...
What kind of books?
Are these part of your stock?
This is my stock, yes.
It is for sale, these books, yes.
And are most of your customers in Holland?
No, not at all.
No, very international business.
I sell perhaps 10% in the Netherlands, 20% perhaps.
And I do a lot of business with America, with libraries and private persons.
And also within Western Europe and Japan, yes.
So would you say you have a lot of... You've continued with clients that were established by your family?
Or you've developed your own... Of course, many people died and they're coming new customers, but yes.
But same kinds of books you deal with?
As my mother did?
Or in the family did?
Yes, yes.
now everybody has a bit of course you have a kind of tradition and a client for that but also yes everybody has his own favorites i myself like more the good illustrated book early books and nice bindings for instance my mother was more interested in in the contents more i'm also interested in but i also
like it when a good artist illustrates Princess the book.
I love illustrated books too, actually.
If we could just, if you could tell me, I know you were born after the war, but you certainly must know the experiences.
Barney says that the fact that your mother survived is a miracle.
You read the letter here.
um yes not meant now i would tell so the firm was established 15 uh 1559 1859 in 59 uh start the fell time a few months because jews were not allowed to work everywhere and then after a short time we went to munich when he was about to to work there
And then at some time his brothers came into the firm and one of his brothers is the grandfather of Barney.
So that was the relation.
But perhaps he explained that already to you.
So my grandfather came into the business, Norbert Rosetta.
So in the 30s, Norbert Rosenthal, my grandfather, was in the business, and his three sons, Fritz Rosenthal, that was my father, and two brothers, Ernst and Paul, two older brothers, that were twins.
And now in 37, I think, 1937, Jewish businesses had to close.
They came, yeah, for Walters, I don't know how you call it in English.
So my parents decided to leave Germany, to fly, and went to the Netherlands, which was not fine enough, actually.
And the grandparents stayed, and my grandfather died in concentration camp, Theresienstadt.
um now my parents went to the netherlands and also one of the brothers power off in town the other brother i don't like the hills as i was in concentration camp and could i think with money in at the beginning before the war started you could get people free and he went to england
So Paul, now my parents had to hide from the Netherlands and very many different places.
And Paul was, how do you say, someone told people he is there.
So he was caught and died in concentration camp.
So somebody informed down there.
Yes, because he could get money from that.
And my mother and her mother also were caught.
Your mother was five?
Yes, but together with her mother, she came off to do the amendments.
Your mother and grandmother?
Yes, but from the other side, not from the Oshenthal side.
And they were in Westerbork, as a concentration camp.
And my mother lost also, first she was in jail here in The Hague, and she was pregnant and lost a child that was taken, died of, she didn't know.
And...
Now my mother belongs to the very few people who came back after the war from Westerbork because there were one moment there was a train strike because Westerbork was not a... from Westerbork the trains went to Auschwitz and so on to the destroying camps and so at the end of the war
It was a train strike, so my mother belongs to her.
I think one of the people who stayed there till the end of the war.
How do you spell that?
Can you spell it?
Westerbork?
Yes.
W-E-S-T-E-R-B-O-R-K.
Okay.
And that's in what country?
In the Netherlands, in the Netherlands.
So the Germans had a camp here?
Yes.
Okay.
And the purpose was to bring people from there to other camps.
So my mother belongs to the very few, I think, only 400 people who came and returned.
And my father wasn't caught.
He was hiding during the war.
Here, still in the Netherlands?
In the Netherlands, yes.
And so they had no knowledge about how the other one was?
No, no, no, no.
now and uh so my parents left in 37 germany and they came from walter someone you had that also in the dutch firms someone from the german states who took over the business so my parents could take i think there were three hundred thousand books or something like that they could take three yeah i read that yes and uh they could take about three thousand books to the netherlands they had three hundred thousand books yes and this was in germany in munich
and they could take uh three thousand books to the Netherlands and this was in 1937 yes but yes and um so some of the books in the Netherlands also were lost of course but some returned
And from the German books, in Germany, someone took over, bookseller, and sold business with those books.
I have material about that.
So my father, after the war, found back some of the books through the Allied forces.
Really?
So after several years, a lot of books came back, but of course, not at all.
But they weren't all destroyed either.
Yes, I think some were also in bombing.
I remember my parents I just thought a few weeks ago I looked at all these procedures they had procedures for many many years just until I think 68 or something like that because they had houses and to get all this money for that and so on and it was very difficult and very emotional
There was a lady in Munich, a not Jewish lady.
who said after the war that she would have married the brother of my father who died in concentration camp if there had not been a war but she didn't go with Paul Rosenthal to the Netherlands and Paul Rosenthal had a fiance in the Netherlands also the niece of another bookseller but actually there was a law and she married posthumely with the brother of my father
And the family should have had a year to complain about that, but of course my parents only heard about that after the year had passed.
Yes, but of course it was hard to do about them for money.
So there were procedures for many, I think until 68 or something like that.
No problems over 20 years?
Yes, yes.
25 years?
Did she finally get something?
Yeah, she got something.
At least she wanted her part of everything, but finally they got a certain amount.
That's terrible.
Oh, yes, and my parents were very emotional about it because she didn't go with him to the Netherlands.
She stayed in Germany.
She stayed, sure.
And he had a fiancé, but of course the procedures were in Germany, so my parents had not such a good chance.
But they were the same judges as before.
So I'm clear how your mother got captured and your father didn't?
No, yes.
My mother wanted to go to the doctor because she was pregnant and then she was caught in the street.
Together with her mother, yeah.
And your father?
How did he find out?
I guess he just didn't come home, right?
Yes.
I don't know exactly.
I think also people who were hiding were taken.
I don't know.
But I can tell you all those stories.
But people did help him.
There were people helping, yes.
What year was she captured?
Do you remember?
44.
So she was captured.
So they were actually able to hide for four or five years, right?
No, only, I think, in 42 people started to hide, I think.
But I hope everything is correct because...
I think my parents, because my parents came from Germany, so in Holland also people thought they were Germans, they had no state, without state, I say, without passport.
First they lived in the Hague, they had to leave the Hague because they were very close to the sea, so that was, the Dutch thought it was dangerous, Germans, former Germans living here, so they went to Hilversum.
So my parents belonged to the first group.
We had to go to, it became a letter that they had to go to the consultation camp and then they decided to hide.
And so when did they find out that they were both alive after the war?
That must have been quite a reunion.
Yes, I think that was or something like that, yes.
Because my mother was freed earlier than my father here.
That was in Drenthe, that's a province where the Allied forces came earlier.
And she survived.
Yes.
And you said one of four hundred from that.
I think so, yes.
A very small number.
A very small number, yes.
Most people have been to Auschwitz and Bacher and so on.
So that is kind of a, that is miraculous.
Yes, yes.
But all the youth who survived
So I think that I can use weight, perhaps, yes.
And you were born when?
What year?
Forty-eight.
So I only can tell you from the stories I work, so I hope it's quite.
And when did you enter the business?
Okay, well, 74, I think.
Yeah, so actually quite some time.
Yes.
So you were a young woman now, but I mean, you were younger than I. You certainly decided at an early age that you wanted to... No, then I worked together with my mother.
So what kinds of things did your mother teach you?
Was your mother a good book woman?
Did she do catalogues and stuff like that?
Yes, and I can show you also the catalogues just recently were made here.
For my mother it was more, the business was more something, my father died from a wrong injection from my doctor
after one of those trips to Germany and he had a pain in his back and the doctor came and within 20 minutes he died and she promised my father to go on with the business because for her that was the only thing in her life actually yes I think that Jewish business which had to go on or so which survives with the war something like that
So that was very important.
It was less important how the business was going or something like that.
So your father basically died a healthy man.
Yes.
So there was no indication that... No, he was very young.
He was 46.
There was nothing to prepare your mother for?
No, no.
And so did she know a lot about the business?
Yes, because she worked already before she was married in the business, in Munich, yes.
So do you think...
This is quite a very prestigious name.
I mean, Rosenthal has a very great name in the bookseller.
It's now for 140 years, right?
Yes, really.
And then you have family members that...
Barney, and you have an uncle in England, yes.
What is it that, you know, Barney talks about the European tradition in bookselling, the knowing the books.
It's more than just being the person who sells books.
I think there's a deeper element involved.
Wouldn't you agree with that?
Well, that varies from dealer to dealer.
I'm sure you know every book that's here.
I'm sure you know it.
You make descriptions of the books and try to know your books, but of course there are also book dealers who just could sell something else.
That's right, they buy something and they try to sell it.
Do you buy for stock or do you buy for customers generally speaking?
No, for stock, but of course you keep in mind which customers you have.
No, but I just buy what I like myself.
And do you generally get from other dealers or auction or private?
Yes, all of them, yeah, yeah.
You said earlier that it was kind of a, you said they came to Holland but they didn't go far enough.
Do you think that maybe they should have gone maybe to the United States?
Yeah, of course, yes.
I don't know.
Yes.
After, as you can say, it was not far enough.
But I don't know if I tried to go to America.
I never heard that.
But you couldn't go everywhere.
For instance, Nico Israel could go to Switzerland, but many people couldn't go there because... And also, my parents only... My mother had a cousin.
He was also a bookseller.
He went to the Netherlands in 1933, and then you could go everywhere.
Or he could go to the Netherlands.
And he had to... How do you say it in English?
my parents only could go to the netherlands because he said he guaranteed for my parents about the money you know because otherwise i couldn't have come to the netherlands this is who guaranteed this i'm sorry a cousin of my mother who was living already he came to in 33 to the netherlands he was also an antiquarian bookseller
And he guaranteed that my people, my parents wouldn't ask the state for money if they had more troubles.
He would guarantee for them.
And that was the reason they could enter the Netherlands, to stay here.
And how soon after the war were they able to restart the business again?
I think rather soon, yes.
But it took several years before the books came back.
The big stop, yes.
And they decided to stay here instead of go back to Germany and go someplace else?
Yes, of course, yes.
So, they're happy being Dutch?
Are you happy with...?
Yes, I think so, because it's not good for Jews to live in Germany, yeah.
I see.
Well, I think, yeah.
Anything else that you think...?
I told you we wouldn't have to spend too much time on this.
Because I am trying to get as balanced as a picture, and it is so hard to talk to these people.
Yes.
Very few of them even are alive.
Yes, of course, all the colleagues, but they are very nervous also to talk about all those things, what happens here and so on.
Did your parents talk much about it?
Probably not, right?
No, my father, I was seven when my father died, and so my mother talked about it, yes.
But, for instance, in that lecture are things I didn't know.
Really?
Also about our firm.
About your firm?
Also, yes.
Because Mr. Bramsters went to the Rijksinstituut for Ordersdokumentatie.
It is an institute for war documentation.
And there he found also things about our firm.
But like what in particular was the firm?
No, about the name of Verwalter, the man in the Netherlands who got into charge of the firm.
And...
what their estimation was of the value of the firm, for instance.
That's it.
Yeah, he found it, yes.
That's good.
So a lot of the questions I might have are probably right in here, do you think?
Yes, but it's not complete because many colleagues didn't want to talk, or said we talked to Mr. Beimsters, but perhaps you should talk to him.
This lecture is about the Dutch antiquarian booksellers,
before the war most of them were jewish people and were very simple so they also dealt in vegetables and so on and were standing on markets and didn't know much about their books and then came the emigrants from germany that were also another kind of many of them learned people so after the war the antiquarian book table had a higher level
That's excellent.
Like I said, I really don't have a whole lot to... No.
I did want to get the story of your parents.
And did your mother ever talk much about life in the concentration camp?
No, she told some things, but not so much, no.
And she lost a child?
Yes, yes.
And do you have any other siblings?
You're the only child?
No, I'm the only child, yes.
Yes.
So do you think, are you hoping we'll be a fifth generation in the book business?
I have children.
No, not in the books.
I don't think so.
One of my sons is studying chemistry and the other is becoming an engineer, so I don't think so.
So what happens to the firm, do you think?
I don't know.
But you love it.
You still very much enjoy it.
Yes, so we'll see.
I don't know.
Do you collect books yourself at all?
Sometimes.
No, not really.
I have a few Hebrew books.
That's very interesting.
Judaica or... No, those in Hebrew.
Yes, for instance, because you ask if I do the same things as my mother, so now and then I deal with Hebrew books.
So you really learned the business from your mother, obviously.
You were seven years old.
Yes, yes.
Was there anyone else?
helped you learn the business yeah we always had people working for us yes this is very interesting a woman i can't think of any other case where a woman succeeds a woman in the business this is a very unusual can you think of another case yeah think about it
I don't know.
Because it's women and it's not common to see many women.
No, in Holland not.
Perhaps in America more women are working.
Yes, but how many are succeeded by women?
No.
So what did your mother teach you that's most valuable about books?
Obviously a sense of tradition.
Yes, of course I worked two years with Bayer.
So the first things I learned there, how to collate a book and so on, yes.
no yeah she is very interested or was interested in incutables and this is 15th century printed books and 16th century books so I learned a lot about those books yes are you still able to find incutables?
yes yes you see all those online incutables where do you find them these days private homes?
no not so much no of course there are sometimes collections which are sold again but
Not in the ceiling, how are you saying?
No, no.
Yeah.
Okay.
Like I said, I didn't think that we had a lot.
I really am interested in, you know, because I can't talk to your mother.
No, no.
She's very childish, how are you saying?
I understand.
Yes.
So I'm happy then to get a secondhand story where I can.
I talked to, you know, Lucien Goldschmidt for instance.
Yeah.
I talked to his wife, Marguerite, and she was very helpful, and there was another woman, whose name escapes me right now, another woman in New York, whose husband also was a book star.
here a little by little yes not of course if you talk to max and nico israel but max israel also won't have told you too much hey he's also he doesn't want to speak about it i think yeah he gave me some pre-spects he was with a with a forest in the forest with a man yeah he talked about it a little bit nico talked for us yes but he was in switzerland he was he had not such a horrible part yes a little easier in switzerland not easier but but less dangerous shall we say yes
It wasn't easy for anyone.
Of course, in Holland, Mr. Emmering, but he's also 83.
All those people lost their stocks because there came those men who took charge and then other Dutch dealers bought those stocks and they had nothing.
Do you agree with Barney and others who say that, you know, I guess with the loss of all these booksellers from Germany,
The book trade in Germany, it's just now beginning to recover.
Do you agree with that?
I don't know who it was before the war.
I think the book sell, I think, in Germany.
Yes.
And, which I perhaps shouldn't say, but a few of them were very rich after the war.
It wasn't.
They learned about the war.
I think so.
Yes.
But you said the stock was 300,000?
Yes, because I just... Now, it has been millions of books before, I think, 1900s.
But I just found that in one of the... Introductions to a Catalogue.
I found that in the 20s or something like that.
And Barney wrote quite a bit about that.
Also, not Barney, but there's an article that was published by Harvard University.
It gives a very good background of the...
the family business.
So I've got a lot of background.
Yes, yes.
So I really don't have to cover it.
No, but he is, of course, of the other.
He is the senator of the Jacques Frouche Tower.
And his parents, my parents did better.
He also went in 1933 to Switzerland and to America.
So my family did not so good for him.
Yeah.
Well, I'm not going to take up too much of your time.
I do get back things they have and so on.
Yeah.
And also because
One very expensive book.
My parents gave it to... Yes, but I don't know if you have to say something about it.
But when it became dangerous, my parents gave one very expensive book to someone in Germany.
I don't have the documents about it, but he sold it to the Bayes' Staatsbibutake in Munich.
And I just saw a few weeks ago in the Royal Library in Hague that they have an exhibition catalogue that said from 1940 that they just bought that book.
And I know from many catalogues that my parents possess that book, only the fact that they gave it
to hide it to someone and that he sold it.
I have no documents about it.
And I just started to think about if I can do something about it because there was never and my parents never tried to do something about that book because it was a difficult thing to prove but now every day and because of the Swiss banks have to give money back now and so on perhaps I will do something about it.
Well I won't mention names
because I don't want to get in trouble either, but what you're saying in a very general way is that your parents turned a book over to a German bookseller for safekeeping?
Yes, to a private person, yes, to safekeeping.
A private person, and my mother always, but that I only know from what she told me.
He sold it in 1940 to the Bayerische Staatsbeutek and that I can prove because there's an exhibition catalogue in that the library writes that you just could buy that book.
Oh and it says who they bought it from too?
No.
No, no.
But what was the name of the library?
Bayerische Staatsbeutek.
Which is that?
Yes, I don't know if you write it.
That is the main library.
In German?
Bayerische BA.
Do you remember the name of the book?
Yes.
Maybe you could write that down too.
Next page.
Yes, but I don't know if you want to... because I perhaps want to do something about what could... Don't worry.
We have lawyers.
I don't do anything without... Yes.
During my parents' book, or my grandfather, at the end of the last century, must have been for a lot of money because it is in catalogs of 1900 and 1920s.
He couldn't sell it for 300,000 during March, which was a very lot of money.
Because they thought it was the first printed book, printed before the Gutenberg Bible.
No, Gutenberg Bible was the first... Yes, but then they assumed that that book was earlier.
So... This book here?
Yes.
So there are many books about these books, and many books are published about... And how many copies are in existence?
Now then they knew only about this copy, but now a few other copies know.
But now some scientists think this is a bit later, this book made it a bit later, but still discussion about it because it is undated.
Where was it printed in mines?
I will show you.
Okay, I'd love to see it.
We don't know, this is from the computer now, this is everything.
Missale Fischale, the first thought that was printed in Mainz, now perhaps I think it is Basel, okay.
It is sort of a difficult thing.
1473.
Yes, and the first thought is earlier.
So it is a difficult thing, but there are just very few copies.
And we think Meister is the printer?
Yes, perhaps.
Could I get a Xerox of this?
Yeah, I think, yes.
Yes, I don't know, because, yeah, of course you can, this is public information.
Yeah, don't worry about it.
There are only a few copies, and now you have heard of Karls, you know?
Of course.
Yes, so he made a catalogue when he was 50 years in the book business, of most important books he sold during his life.
And he starts with another copy of this book, and it's number one.
Number one.
When he saw this copy, he saw the first printed book, you know?
Afterwards, there was a discussion.
And the Pierpont Morgan book.
Yeah, yes.
So I heard the librarian of the Pierpont Morgan always, Mr. Bühler, always was...
I'm sure that it was early.
See, I can get this out of here.
Okay, but I don't think you should... Well, what I would like to suggest... Perhaps I will try to.
And I can't prove, you know.
But let me just ask you some questions, and then you'll see how I...
You understand that before the war your parents had a copy of this book?
I'm sure.
Okay.
And I know because I went to the library and I know my great-grandparents.
I know in several catalogs, for instance in 1928, I know they still had it.
And I also got a notice in 1898 they had it.
So this was in the family for many years.
Yes.
But if you couldn't sell it, I think it was different, yes.
But, yes, in 1925, they asked 300,000 marks and also... 1925.
Yes, and also at the beginning of the 20th century already.
300.
See, this is factual.
That is factual.
Yes.
I can show you.
And do you know which catalog, what number it was?
Yes, for instance, in catalog 164 from 1925, which is there,
on the number 104 that i know well okay so this is factual that is fact and so when they had to leave germany you were yes but i can't prove that my parents didn't sell it to the man and that he was not allowed to sell it himself so that is that is what i perhaps will try to do something about
But it is difficult.
It's quite difficult.
But when you said that they were allowed to bring 3,000 books, why wouldn't they have brought that one, do you think?
Yes, but I think they gave it already earlier to that man.
I see.
And this was for safekeeping?
Yes.
That's what my mother told me.
But I have, of course, no records about it.
I only now have those catalogs.
And I know that in 1940 it was in the library.
Anyway, it still is in the library.
In 1940 it was in?
In that library I wrote you down.
Yes, okay.
It was a Gutenberg anniversary exhibition in Munich in 1940 and it was in there with a note that could acquire that copy.
And it was the copy of Rosenthal because there is a lot of publications about this book because they thought it was so spectacular now, you know, so there are many many books written about that book.
this is a very interesting story but of course perhaps a few months ago or perhaps because of all those publications perhaps I can do something about it because I know my mother was angry about it but it would not have made sense five years ago to do something because you will lose this case because you can't prove everything
Is that person dead?
Oh yes, yes, a long time ago.
Well, he's dead, so what's his name?
No, I don't tell you.
Okay, okay.
But my husband, he is a lawyer, and he thought perhaps you could do something about it.
I don't know, I talked to several people.
I don't know if I could do something.
It's not the money, it's the fact that... Perhaps it is also the money.
I don't want to look back, but no, yes, no, yeah, but this...
Perhaps it is also the money.
Yes, and the idea, yes.
Yes.
But perhaps it goes very emotionally.
It costs only money for lawyers and so on, and it doesn't make any sense that I do nothing.
But you see, I was just thinking about it or something.
Because of all the other things, there were lawsuits and fighting, but about this nothing was done.
you know and the fact is this was in your family for a long time yes yes and of course it is not worth so much anymore because it is not so special as they thought but still it's very interesting it's not unique but it's not unique and it's later later so uh but it's still very important
I'll hand, whatever I do with this, I have your fax, I have your email, we can talk.
Yes.
But I didn't try to, I didn't talk to the Barista's take about this, I did nothing.
So now, just ask several people.
Well, I could certainly ask them how they acquired it, as a journalist asking a question.
Yes, yes, you can.
No problem.
You know, there was also a man who... He said it's very funny, let's see if I can find it.
There was Mr. Alan Stephenson, and he wrote in 67, the pattern of the Missale Speciale.
And what did he say?
Oh yeah, he's...
It was funny how he could cost perhaps Ian for it, but he died.
And here's the character.
He said, the first excellent copy was discovered in Munich and the rest remained in that city.
Unterhub came upon it at the Friedrich Reum bookstore about 1880 and purchased it for Pippens.
He's talking about your family now.
No, but Unterhub found a book.
Someone else who sold it to our firm.
He placed it in the hands of the Luther Rolfenthal Antiquariate in 1896.
It ventured as far as the British Museum in 1899, but year after year remained unsewed.
So it was offered to the people of Morgan in 1906 for 300,000.
In 1906?
Wolfmarks, yes.
He known more than I know also.
And it was even sent across a planting on a pole pole.
And ultimately, and that's funny how he says, ultimately it was absorbed into the great British task you take.
Absorbed, he says.
Perhaps he knew more about it, but he also wanted to come ask him.
And who is he?
Mr. Alan Stephenson, he wrote in 67 a book about that book, The Problem of the Missale Speciale.
I think tonight, ultimately, it was absorbed into the grave by the stars.
There was a book, there was the title of that book?
The problem of the... Yes, his, yes.
So that you'll find it in every library.
And it's S-T-E-V-E-N-S-O-N?
S-T-E-V-E-N-S-O-N, yes.
How is it?
A-L-L-E-N or A-L-A-N?
A-L-L-A-N.
Alan Stevenson.
So I did some research, I don't have that book, but...
So he knew that this copy was sent to Priebant-Norvin and he bought another copy of Mr. Krause later.
The copy which is... You see, this is one of the stories, we're talking about books.
To add insult to injury, I mean, they took the book and... Yes, but as I can't prove it...
It's difficult, so, before you write... No, no, don't worry about it, but did your father try and get it back after the war?
I don't know, I was seven, I don't know, I don't know.
But my mother told me about it, and she was already in the firm, from Sir de Vriand or something like that.
I wonder if they approached the man after the war and said... No, I don't think so, because they had so many such... dachets, how do you say it?
Dachets.
about all those procedures.
They got crazy about that, of course.
So this was difficult, but now you have more cases like that in Holland as well, and they try to get things back from Donchett's home and paintings and so on.
And now people can't say so easily anymore, perhaps, well, okay, if it's finished and you don't have... There's a case going on right now about some paintings.
Yes.
It's a big, big, big case.
Yes, yes.
It's all difficult stories, but now people have to discuss and listen.
There's a story in the New York Times, if I can find it, I'll send it to you, about paintings, but it's the same kind of a thing.
Yes, yes.
Everywhere in the world now.
And it looks to me like they've got a pretty good claim.
Yes.
Because there's codes in the book.
You can prove that you had that book.
Yes, but for instance, they gave it to someone, the paintings, and he sold it to Germans or such a difficult thing.
But then he says, well, I've got a bill, I sold it, I bought it from him, but I don't have a bill of saving.
Yes.
Do you have a receipt?
No, of course you don't have.
Everything is lost.
Yes.
We don't have our, how do you say, documentations anymore, nothing, no.
I'll be very cautious with this.
Yes, because perhaps I do something about it.
Yes.
We probably did it right in 49, so already.
Then I think... Silas makes it so hard.
Yes.
Because who would you recover from?
He's dead.
Yes, yes.
And if the boy starts, will you take date for it?
But they knew, they knew that it was, had been for my parents because, or from the firm, because there were so many publications.
They always talk about the Rosenthal copy.
That they don't... So that is a difficult point, so... Museums are horrible on this.
They look the other way, as long as they don't know.
No, it was war, it was war, so... This is war.
And people died in concentration camps, so, yeah.
But, for instance, there's another story, I don't know, but we have two big German auctions, and you're often invited to auction dinners during such auctions,
Once I was sitting next to the wife of one of the important German antiquarian book centers.
And she told me the whole evening what they were processing, you know, about how many extra houses they have got and books and everything.
And in Holland you have a tradition, you don't show off, people don't.
don't have expensive jewellery, you don't show off, you always complain about what you don't have, that you don't have money or something.
So that's all right, not a tradition in Holland, but that was enormous the whole night, she told me, and then I told my mother, and she said, oh, they became so rich during the war, you know.
So, yeah, they have all the important books in the world, they have got,
Of course, these books were there to be... Yeah, for nothing, or just taken, or I don't know, of course I don't know the exact story, but... Well, these, uh, smoke these fires, they say.
Yes, yes, yes.
And, of course, that's one book that you lost, imagine.
That's one out of three.
They lost many, many, many books, of course, but that is the only book my mother told me often about.
And she kept...
There was some news about it, he kept it because, yes.
And of course this is a person they must have trusted?
Yes.
Was he an employee of your father?
No, no, no.
Or just a friend?
The person who found the book also and sold it to the firm, yes.
I understand.
I think.
Now what?
Now someone discovered that book, bought it and sold it to my parents and then they, and he published also a lot of books about that book and then they gave it to him
He was the person who saw it, so they gave it to him.
He knew better than anybody what it was.
He knew what it was, yes.
I see now.
Was he a youngish man or an older man, I wonder, at that time?
Neither, yes.
When I was born in 1859.
He was this man?
Yes.
If it is this man, if you know that, I think...
I can't ask my mother anymore.
No, I understand.
That's going to make it very difficult.
So difficult, and also that I don't want that you... If I get some more facts, you know, I can tell you, but at this moment it is difficult.
I would not name any names anyway, so I would not identify anybody.
But it's a fact that you had the book.
It's a fact that you don't have the book now.
They never have the money.
My parents are never the money.
The fact is in that library.
That is a fact.
And it's a fact that they had to flee Germany and leave their books behind.
These are facts.
The business was not closed yet when my parents fled and my great-grandfather stayed and died in Theresienstadt.
I'm not a lawyer, and I'm not putting a case in court.
I'm just writing stories, and you've persuaded me.
And, you know, I'm writing my story.
You understand what I'm saying?
You talked to Roland about this.
Because I'm going to see Anne-Marie and Roland in a couple of weeks.
I'm giving a talk at the Grolier Club in two weeks, and I may see them again.
Okay, he's the only one, and I ask him to say anything about it.
But also, I wanted to know how much there.
So, you know, that was one reason.
And people have been pretty much before there.
Good and bad viable benefits.
There have been a thing of many, many millions, and that's not the case.
An extraordinary value.
What do you think the value was, though?
Yeah, as we discussed it, as difficult as that.
A million?
Half a million?
Oh, no, no, no.
I don't think so.
18 before 1473 is...
Yes, but I've also, yes, thank you also for talking.
It is still very very well.
I would think, I don't think so.
There are a few copies of that book.
And of course it's... This copy, there are actually a few leaves, but the people are more of a copy of that book, yes.
Very interesting.